---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 13 (July 6-July 12, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
mathjax: true
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinate me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Drug discovery

### ADME properties of antibodies

I found an interesting review about adsorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion (ADME) properties of biologics, focusing especially on the learnings
from small molecules: [Thomayant Prueksaritanont and Cuyue Tang, AAPS Journal,
2012](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3385832/)), thanks to
recommendation by colleagues. A related paper, [Jain *et al.*, PNAS,
2017](https://www.pnas.org/content/114/5/944), examines biophysical properties
of the clinical-stage antibodies, which I would like to imagine as
&lsquo;survivors&rsquo; of discovery and development programs, and provides a
complementary view on this topic.

On the antibody side, many antibodies follow the structure of [Immunoglobulin G
(IgG) antibodies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immunoglobulin_G), the most
common type of antibody found in circulation and extracellular fluids. IgG
consists of both heavy and light chains. Besides IgG, there are other four
heavy-chain *isotypes*, known as IgA, IgD, IgE, and IgM. With regard to light
chain, there are two *isotypes*: $\kappa$ and $\lambda$. Here, *isotype (class)*
means the unique constant region segments of the immunoglobulin gene which form
the fragment crystallizable (Fc) region and the lower segment of the fragment
antigen-binding (Fab) portion of an antibody. More about isotypes can be found
on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isotype_(immunology)).

There are four subclasses of IgGs (IgG1-4). IgG1 (crossing placenta, complement
activation, and high affinity to Fc receptor on phagocytic cells), IgG2 (not
crossing placenta, moderate complement activation, but extremely low affinity),
and IgG4 (crossing placenta, no complement activation, and intermediate
affinity) are often chosen as the antibody formats. Many variants and formats of
antibodies are available nowadays, which are reviewed by [Spiess *et
al.*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016158901500005X#!).

IgG alone can protect the body from infection through the activities of its
antigen binding region. However, immune functions of IgGs are much mediated by
proteins and receptors that binding to the Fc region of IgG, known collectively
as [Fc receptors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fc_receptor). Fc receptors can
be classified into three classes by the antibody type that they bind to:
Fc-gamma receptors (binding to IgG antibodies), Fc-alpha receptors (binding to
IgA antibodies), and Fc-epsilon receptors (binding to IgE antibodies).

Fc-gamma receptors (Fc$\gamma$R) receptors contain many classical membrane-bound
surface receptors, as well as atypical intracellular receptors and cytoplasmic
glycoproteins. A particular atypical Fc$\gamma$R, the neonatal Fc receptor
(FcRn), is particularly interesting, among others because it can strongly
influence IgG biology, including stability and PK/PD profiles of IgG format
antibodies and albumin. It acts as a recycling or transcytosis receptor that
maintains IgG in the circulation, and transport them across cellular barriers.
It is also an immune receptor by interacting with and assisting antigen
presentation of peptides derived from IgG immune complexes. Two interesting
reviews about biology of FcRn can be found in [Roopenian and Akilesh, Nature
Reviews Immunology, 2007](https://www.nature.com/articles/nri2155) and in
[Pyzik, *et al.*, Front. Immunol.,
2019](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2019.01540/full).

### Multispecific drugs

I summarized my learning notes in [another post]({% post_url
2020-07-09-multispecific-drugs %}).

## Computational biology

### Applied bioinformatics for the identification of regulatory elements

[Wasserman and Sandelin, Nature Review Genetics,
2004](https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg1315) is a classic paper in the field
of bioinformatics and genomics. It introduced key concepts such as position
weight matrix (PWM), also known as position-specific score matrix (PSSM),
phylogenetic footprinting (identification of conserved regulatory elements by
comparing genomic sequences between related sequences), as well as combinatorial
interaction of transcription factors via cis-regulatory module (CRM) analysis.
These and other concepts introduced in the paper are fundamental for many tools
that we use today to characterize elementary features in genomes.

In Box 1 of the paper, the authors gave an example on how to derive a PWM from a
set of aligned sequences. Unfortunately, there seem to be a few typos in the
tables, which obscures the interpretation. Here are some that I found:

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/Wasserman-NRG-2004.png"
description="Box 1 of Wasserman and Sandelin, Nature Review Genetics, 2004, with
typos in panel D fixed (texts in red)."
%}

## Statistics

### Hill tail-index estimator and Hill equation

The Hill tail-index estimator was proposed by Bruce M. Hill as a simple and
general method to inference about the tail behaviour of a distribution ([Hill
*et al.*](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.aos/1176343247)). It does not assume
any global form for the distribution function, but only the form of the behaviour
in the tail where it is desired to draw inference. It is a way to describe
[heavy-tailed
distributions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heavy-tailed_distribution#Hill's_tail-index_estimator),
besides Pickand's and Ratio estimators of the tail-index.

Do not mix it with the [Hill coefficient in Hill equation in
biochemistry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hill_equation_(biochemistry)), which
is attributed to the English physiologist [Archibald Vivian (A.V.)
Hill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archibald_Hill). As the Hill coefficient
increases, the saturation curve becomes steeper.

## Other gems

* I read this week the book [Man's Search for
    Meaning](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4069.Man_s_Search_for_Meaning)
    by Victor Frankl. The conclusion I draw is that we do not ask life for a
    meaning, rather life asks us for a meaning. Given circumstances, we have to
    make active choices and live a life that we think worth living.
* [Math book recommendations for
    teenagers](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23711942), discussion on
    hacker news.
* [Design thinking for data
    products](https://www.researchworld.com/design-thinking-for-data-products-part-1-of-3/)
    by Norbert Wirth and Martin Szugat.
* [Wir haben das Hier und Jetzt. Und das ist alles, was wirklich
    z√§hlt](https://www.unibas.ch/de/Aktuell/News/Uni-Research/Wir-haben-das-Hier-und-Jetzt.-Und-das-ist-alles-was-wirklich-zaehlt.html)
    (We have Here and Now. This is all that really matters), an interview with
    Prof. Dr. Andrew Gloster (in German).

Happy weekend!
