---
layout: single
title: Things that I learned about keeping mentally healthy during the coronavirus pandemic
category: career
tags: emotion
---

This is the sixth week that people in Switzerland are quarantined due to the
coronavirus pandemic. The situation is the same for many people in many
countries. A tough time for many of us. 

My biggest challenge so far is to focus on work during working hours and to
balance between work and family life. I think a pain point is the paradoxical
combination of lack of personal contact and overwhelming virtual information and
communication.

On the positive side, here are a few things that I am learning: how to live with
emotions, how to communicate effectively, how to master information instead of
being mastered, and last but not least, how to balance between life and work.
Below I document my learnings and thoughts to be read by my later self. If you
find one point or another interesting or useful, I will be more than happy.

## Learning to live with emotions

One metaphor (or a hypothesis) may help in learning to live with emotions:
riding an elephant. As far as I can tell, it was discussed in depth in the book
*The Happiness Hypothesis: Putting Ancient Wisdom to the Test of Modern Science*
by Jonathan Haidt. The central hypothesis is that we live with our emotions as
if we ride an elephant. We are the rider, and the emotion is an elephant. When
the elephant is in good mood, we think that we can fully control it. However,
there are situations where we may find it difficult or nearly impossible to
control the elephant. 

This hypothesis was particularly helpful for me because it made me clear that
that we not our emotions, and we have to control them. It is in our nature,
likely both hard-coded in our genome by the evolution and soft-coded in our
culture, that we have the emotions and we have to live with them and, if we
decide to, to control them.

A prerequisite to controlling our emotion is our physical health - the mind-body
axis needs to be in a good shape. Eating, sleeping, and physical exercise matter
tremendously. 

Besides keeping healthy physically, the RAIN technique may help to tame our
emotions. There are many articles on the internet about this technique. I
learned it mainly from two of them: [*Manage Emotional Pains with
RAINS*](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/changepower/201202/manage-emotional-pains-rains)
by Meg Selig, and [你的队友和孩子有没有在家呆到精神失常？
](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/jRRHPfhy64V0AQFHRnTCaw) by Xiaocheng Dai (戴晓橙,
network ID 橙子, mindbodygarden.com), in Chinese.

RAIN means **Recognize**, **Acknowledge** (or Allow, or Accept), **Investigate** (or Inquire), and **Nourish**. 

* **Recognize** means that the first step is to recognize the emotions or
 thoughts that are troubling. Observe them without judgement, just like you are
 observing weather changing or moon rising. Naming them can also help shrink
 them to manageable size, for instance 'I am overwhelmed by virtual
 communication', or 'I am worried for my friends who belong to the high-risk
 population of the corona virus'.
* **Acknowledge** means that next to accept the emotion as a reality. This can
 be tough and difficult to follow. But accepting the emotion as a reality does
 not mean that you have to like it. It means to nail mental contents, pleasant or
 not, down under observation and in focus. The aim is to stop the emotions being
 amorphous. 'Okay, I am overwhelmed by virtual communication'.
* **Investigate** means that to use curiosity and analytical ability to analyse
 the emotion. Talk with yourself with kindness: what triggered the distress?
 Have I experienced similar situations before? What thoughts and feelings are
 connected to these feelings? Is my thinking reasonable and realistic? What
 actions can I take to help myself or another person? What help do I need? What
 can I do?
* **Nourish** (or nurture, or non-identification): the thoughts, feelings, and
 sensations are not *you*. Step to the side, watch the emotions objectively,
 and take care of yourself. Do things that nourish you: listening to music,
 reading a book, or taking a deep breath.

Meg Selig recommends a fifth step, **Self-compassion** (making the synonym
RAINS). It is merged into the *Nourish* item in the post by Xiaocheng. The key
idea is to be friendly, generous, and sympathize with oneself. 

It can be challenging for some people, especially those who aim to be perfect,
to learn the humanness, imperfection of oneself and live with that. But it is a
necessary requisite to emphasize with lovers, friends, and other people. 

If you find your emotions nearly out of control, recalling the *RAIN* my help.

## Learning to communicate effectively

Given the special circumstances, it becomes more important to communication
effectively. A lot of words are spent on this topic. Here are a few suggestions
that I found useful to me. Most of them are discussed in the context of
communication between family members. They may help in other contexts, though.

Effective communication needs open discussion of responsibility, which in turn
requires that both parties know what they want to achieve: do I want support
from the communication partner? Do I want acknowledgement of him or her? Express
that clearly, without any ambiguity.

Next, learn to live with being rejected in communication. Being rejected happens
often, not only in communication but also in buyer-seller relationships, in job
applications, *etc.* Being rejected does not mean you as a person is rejected.
Try to find alternatives and to handle a solution that satisfy both parties.

In short, effective communication involves clear formulation of one's wishes and
thoughts, open exchange, readiness to take set-backs and to compromise.

## Learning to master information overload

As said at the beginning, I am overwhelmed by a lot of information around. Not
all of them are of high quality - some are more confusing or misleading than
helpful - and much of them are of little use at all.

What helped me was to learn to balance *being informed* but not *being sucked*.
Concretely, it helped to set clear boundaries between activities, both
spatial and temporal, and treat 'information gathering' as one activity that
needs to be separated from other ones. 

To focus on the real life - the valuable time with parents, spouses, and kids -
also helped. Doing things, however trivial they are, that help other people
helped me to stay in touch with my loved ones. It can be just walking with someone,
doing exercise with them, or explaining the kids things that they did not
understand. What I gained was valuable experience and fulfilling time.

Last but not least, I found doing things alone that I enjoy is a good
meditation. It helped me to shred worries and smooth my emotions by making
music, reading both scientific papers and comic strips, and writing essays and
blog posts.

In short, setting boundaries of activities and finding time both for others and
for myself helped me to master information overload.

## How to balance life and work

It is a constant struggle to balance life and work. During the corona time, I
found it even more challenging to do the balance well. And sometimes I feel
ashamed that I cannot work as much as I wish so.

On the other side, I now see the time as a chance to observe the balance from a
new light. First, I value learning without goals more. Second, I better see my
egos and ambitions, and learn to set realistic expectations and goals for myself
and for others. And finally, I learn to observe how I and my family
members pursue their goals. 

To write about life-work balance will need another blog post. Here, it suffices
to state that I am learning to accept the situation, and trying to make the best
out of the situation.

## Conclusions

This is an ongoing journey. It seems now that many colleagues who work in the
office are not able to return to their desks earlier than mid-June. Until then,
I have to learn to improve on all these aspects - controlling my emotions,
communicating effectively, mastering information overload, and balancing work
and life.

Stay healthy, both physically and mentally, whenever possible. And enjoy the
precious time with your beloved ones or with yourself.
