---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 10 (June 15-21, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
mathjax: true
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinate me this week.

Before we start, here is a small piece *A theme from the Musetta's Walzer* that
I recorded this week. It was a simplified version of the *Piccolo Valzer*
composed by Giacomo Puccini, and the theme is used in his Opera *La Boheme*.

<iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
allow="autoplay"
src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/840122590&color=%23ff5500&auto_play=false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&show_reposts=false&show_teaser=true"></iframe><div
style="font-size: 10px; color: #cccccc;line-break: anywhere;word-break:
normal;overflow: hidden;white-space: nowrap;text-overflow: ellipsis;
font-family: Interstate,Lucida Grande,Lucida Sans Unicode,Lucida
Sans,Garuda,Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;font-weight: 100;"><a
href="https://soundcloud.com/jdzhang" title="JDZhang" target="_blank"
style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">JDZhang</a> Â· <a
href="https://soundcloud.com/jdzhang/20200614-thema-aus-mesettas"
title="20200614-Thema-aus-Mesettas-Waltzer" target="_blank" style="color:
#cccccc; text-decoration: none;">20200614-Thema-aus-Mesettas-Waltzer</a></div>

<br/>

* TOC
{:toc}

## Drug discovery

### DNA-encoded library, machine learning, and virtual screening

I documented [in another blog post]({% post_url 2020-06-19-ML-DEL %}) my
learning of the paper by authors from Google and X-Chem, describing a machine
learning approach to learn from DEL screening hits and to perform virtual
screening with made-on-demand libraries. It is a nice application of graph
network methods.

## Biology

### DNA of neutrophil extracellular traps promotes cancer metastasis via CCDC25

Neutrophils are cells in the blood that are promptly (within minutes) and
strongly activated upon infection by microorganisms. They have a very special
trick to clear microorganisms: they can secret neutrophil extracellular traps,
which consist of chromatin DNA filaments that are coated with proteins that are
usually stored in granules in the cells. These traps made of DNA and proteins
coat and lock the microorganisms so that the whole thing can be cleared by
phagocytotic cells like macrophages.

The traps, alas, seem not only provide advantage to the host, though. [Yang *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2394-6) reported on *Nature*
that they found abundant such traps in the metastases, and the traps in the
serum can predict the occurrence of metastases. They report that DNA in the
traps, known as neutrophil-extracellular-trap (NET) DNA, attract cancer cells
rather than acting only as a &lsquo;trap&rsquo;. They found that the protein
[CCDC25](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2394-6) (coiled-coil domain
containing 25, GeneID 55246) acts as a NET-DNA sensor, which can act the
ILK-beta-parvin pathway to enhance cell motility.

They showed that NET-mediated metastasis can be abrogated in CCDC25-knockout
cells. The results suggest that targeting CCDC25 may be a therapeutic strategy
for the prevention of cancer metastasis.

A [News and
Views](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01672-3) article by Emma Nolan
and Ilaria Malanchi summarizes the findings.

### Notch3 drives synovial fibrosis and arthritis

The synovium, also known as the synovial membrane, is a connective tissue that
lines the inner surface of capsules of synovial joints and tendon sheath. It is
a mesenchymal tissue composed mainly of fibroblasts that surrounds the joints.

In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the synovial tissue gets enlarged substantially
(known as *hyperplasia*) and becomes inflamed and invasive so that it can
destroy the joint.

[Wei *et al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2222-z) reported on
*Nature* that [NOTCH3](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/4854) (Notch receptor
3, GeneID 4854) signalling drives differentiation of fibroblasts that express
the CD90 protein, product of the [THY1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/7070)
(Thy-1 cell surface antigen, GeneID 7070) gene. They used single-cell sequencing
and synovial tissue organoids to demonstrate that NOTCH3 signalling drives both
transcriptional and spatial gradients, spreading out (`emanating` as the authors
said) from vascular endothelial cells outwards in fibroblasts.

NOTCH3 itself and target genes of the Notch signaling pathways are upregulated
in synovial fibroblasts from patients of active rheumatoid arthritis. The link
between NOTCH3 and inflammatory arthritis is supported by mouse models. The
authors argue that synovial fibroblasts possess a positional identity which is
regulated by Notch signalling derived from endothelial cells. They suggest that
the crosstalk between endothelial cells and fibroblasts via Notch signalling
underlying inflammation and pathology in inflammatory arthritis. The results,
the authors reckoned, provide a molecular basis by which stromal cells, defined
as connective tissue cells of any organ, which usually include fibroblasts and
pericytes, can be therapeutically targeted in rheumatoid arthritis by modulation
of NOTCH3 signalling.

The study identified JAG2 and DLL4, both ligands of Notch3 signalling, expressed
in both synovial tissue and synovial organoid (Figure 3A). The RNA-sequencing
data is available at [ImmPort](https://ww.immport.org) under accession code
SDY1599 for human studies, and at the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession
code [GSE145286](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE145286).
Intermediate data (UMAP projections and normalized counts) are available at the
[single-cell portal of the Broad
Institute](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/SCP469). And the
code for data analysis is available on GitHub
[immunogenomics/notch](http://github.com/immunogenomics/notch).

### Other gems in biology

Here are other gems in biology that I found.

* [Deczkowska *et
  al.*](https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30565-1) explores the
  TREM2 receptor pathway as a major pathology-induced immune signalling
  mediator.
* [Beumer *et al*](https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30501-8)
  reports transcriptomics profiling and secretome analysis of human
  enteroendocrine cells in a human organoid biobank.
* [Yeo *et al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0532-1) reports on
    *Nature Biotechnology* the *EPIC* tool, a web-based analytical and discovery
    platform for mass cytometry data from immune cells in a standarized manner.
* [Javdan *et al.*](https://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/S0092-8674(20)30563-8.pdf)
    reports on *Cell* their effort of personalized mapping of drug metabolism by
    the human gut microbiome.

## Programming

### Submitting Snakemake jobs to Slurm

See my other blog post [Submitting Snakemake jobs to Slurm]({% post_url
2020-06-16-Snakemake-with-slurm %}).

### SQLite as a file format

[SQLite as an application file
format](https://www.sqlite.org/appfileformat.html) was a hot thread on
[HackerNews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18754634). The HDF5 file
format ([website of the HDF group](https://www.hdfgroup.org/), or [Wikipedia on
HDF files](https://www.hdfgroup.org/)) may be an alternative option, especially
for scientific data.

### Other programming tricks that I learned

* Often we have a list of strings in a tab-delimited file, like
    `S1,S2,S3,...,S10,...`, which we would like to sort by the numeric part of
    the string. The solution is to use `sort -V`. `-V` or `--version-sort`
    performs natural sort of (version) numbers within text. Source:
    [nitin@StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/16945134/bash-sort-list-of-strings-by-number-at-the-end).
* `gensub` in `awk` can perform pattern matching and back reference. Below is an
    example. Source: [GNU manual of
    gawk](https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/String-Functions.html).

```bash
echo "S10_10" | awk '{
  a=gensub(/S(.+)_(.+)/, "\\1", "g");
  b=gensub(/S(.+)_(.+)/, "\\2", "g");
  print a,b;}'
## output: 10 10
```

* If files in a directory in Linux shows question marks `?` in every property
  when we use `ls` to list them, it may be that the permissions have gone wrong.
  The solution is to apply `chmod -R a+rX DIR_NAME` to the directory. Source:
  [StackOverflow](https://askubuntu.com/questions/243999/why-do-question-mark-characters-appear-when-changing-the-permissions-of-director).

## Statistics and machine learning

* I summarize three classical approaches to hypothesis testing in
  [this blog post]({% post_url 2020-06-19-hypothesis-testing %}).
* I summarize the mathematical concept of *constraint* and the statistical
  concept of *degree of freedom*, and its derivation in various settings, in
  [this blog post]({% post_url 2020-06-18-degrees-of-freedom %}).

## Other gems

Here are other things that I did and gems that I found.

* I wrote a short blog post [about time]({% post_url 2020-06-17-about-time
    %}).
* If you are impressed, touched, or fascinated by the author Wolfgang Herrndorf
    like I am, here is a website about him that may interest you:
    [ueberwolfgang.de](https://www.ueberwolfgang.de) (in German).
* I learned about what how we can use software to save our voice for the future
  self or future generation, and when it does not help from this Hacker News
  thread [My wife might lose the ability to speak in 3 weeks - how to
  prepare?](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23490115).
* Hacker news thread [Which tools have made you a much better
   programmer?](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23468193). New things that
   I want to try: [i3](https://i3wm.org/) for windows management and improved
   tiling, [strace](https://strace.io/) for diagnostic, debugging and userspace
   utility for linux, and functional  programming.
* I enjoyed reading the Technology Quarterly of the Economist magazine (June
  2020) on artificial intelligence and its limits. The main message that I got:
  A full-blown AI winter is unlikely. [But the autumn is
  coming](https://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2020/06/11/an-understanding-of-ais-limitations-is-starting-to-sink-in).
* [From chaos to free
   will](https://aeon.co/essays/heres-why-so-many-physicists-are-wrong-about-free-will),
   an article on the online life, philosophy, and culture magazine Aeon (more
   exactly, its brand Psyche). I still have to read it, but the beginning reads
   interesting.
* Another an interesting article on Aeon on [how to overcome a fear of
  heights](https://psyche.co/guides/how-to-overcome-a-fear-of-heights-step-by-careful-step)
  by Poppy Brown.
