---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 15 (July 20-July 26, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinate me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Biology

### Dynamics in protein translation sustaining T cell preparedness

Wolf and Jin *et al.* reported on [Nature
Immunology](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41590-020-0714-5) their study of
dynamics of mRNA translation kinetics and protein turnover in human naive and
activated T cells. They found that transcription factors (TFs) maintaining T
cell quiescence had constitutively high turnover, which facilitated their
depletion following activation. Naive T cells maintain a large number of idling
ribosomes, repressed mRNAs, and glycolytic enzymes that can be rapidly engaged
upon stimulation, promoting an immediate translational and glycolytic switch to
ramp up the T cell activation.

They provide a resource of protein turnover, absolute translation kinetics, and
protein synthesis rates in T cells at
[www.immunomics.ch](https://www.immunomics.ch/silac/).

## Computational biology

* Re-use of public sequencing data in Bioconductor with
  [recount2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/workflows/vignettes/recountWorkflow/inst/doc/recount-workflow.html).
* Wang *et al.* reported in
    [Nature Machine
    Intelligence](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-020-0193-2) their
    effort to embed gene-sets into machine-learning applicable structures, named
    as *Set2Gaussian*.
* In the same issue, [Tasaki *et
    al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-020-0201-6) reported their
    attempt to predict differential gene expression between tissues based on
    promoter features (which are associated with binding of transcription
    factors) and mRNA features (associated with binding of either RNA-binding
    proteins or microRNAs) as input.

## Programming

### Continuous documentation, testing, and integration of R packages

See [my other blog post]({% post_url 2020-07-22-updating-ribiosUtils %}) for my
learning notes, with the updating of the
[ribiosUtils](bedapub.github.io/ribiosUtils) package as an example.

## Citizens' Assembly

A citizens' assembly is a unit (body) formed by citizens of a state to
*deliberate*, which means weighing facts and arguments with a view to a choice or
decision and carefully considering the probable consequences of a step, an issue
or issues of local or national importance.

{% include image.html
url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/de/thumb/d/d8/Buergerrat_Demokratie_Abstimmung.jpg/800px-Buergerrat_Demokratie_Abstimmung.jpg"
description="Voting by <i>Bürgerrat Demokratie</i>, a citizens' assembly in
Germany. Photo and permission of use by <i>Bürgerrat Demokratie</i>."
%}

The membership of the assembly is randomly selected. For instance, in a state of
500,000 people, we may decide to draw 500 people randomly, or one per thousand,
to represent all citizens. They can be workers, bankers, medicinal doctors,
students, retired seniors, homeless people, *etc.*. The exact number required to
represent citizens in an unbiased manner is both a statistical and a
sociological question that can be challenging to answer. Nevertheless, the idea
is simple: people are randomly drawn to represent all citizens, what we call
&lsquo;sampling&rsquo; in statistics.

The representatives pause their other duties for a certain period of time, say
one year, and use the time to discuss and consult with other representatives
about questions that requires action, for instance whether to legalise the
consumption of psychological drugs. They do not draft or pass laws, instead they
make suggestions to parliament and government about the topic they deliberate.
All citizens can make decisions based on the recommendations of the assembly,
for example, by a referendum.

The history of citizens' assembly can be traced back to the democracy in Athens.
One of the famous contemporary examples is the [citizens' assembly of
Ireland](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizens%27_Assembly_(Ireland)), which
among others led to the discussion of the issue of abortion and finally to a
successful, peaceful solution of this challenging social issue. More examples can
be found in the [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizens%27_assembly)
page of citizens' assembly.

Multiple features make this model appealing. It encourage individuals to take a
topic seriously and to exchange views with each other. It thrives upon cognitive
diversity and the wisdom of the crowd. The participants are less vulnerable to
vested interest, which are often unavoidable for professional politicians. The
deliberation process, though sometimes perceived as slow and even chaotic, can
lead to better understanding and potentially better resolutions of important,
challenging issues.

I found this form of democracy interesting. It may has the potential to address
some most burning challenges that we face in my opinion, including climate
change, increasing inequality, and waning interest in participating in
democracy.

## Other gems

### Life In A Day (2020)

Life in a Day (2020), a film project to which everyone can contribute, by
filming their life on July 25th, 2020, organized by YouTube: [Life in a Day
2020](https://lifeinaday.youtube/).

The 2010 version is available at
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JaFVr_cJJIY).

### Online recording archive of Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra (BRSO)

Corona has fundamentally changed the way how we listen to live music, at least
for the time being. Good news: many music groups put their video and audio
archive online for free watching. There are many gems there. This week, I
discovered that of
[BRSO](https://www.br-so.de/meisterwerke-der-klassischen-musik/).

Among others is a performance of Piano Concerto No. 2 of Beethoven and the
*&lsquo;Prager&rsquo;* symphony of Mozart by [Igor Levit (piano) and Franz
Welser-Möst
(conductor)](https://www.br-so.de/video/igor-levit-franz-welser-moest/)
especially interesting. It was the first concert after months of pauses. The
empty chairs and extravagant distances between musicians made me almost sad.  We
have the music back, nevertheless, thankfully.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2020-07-BRSO-Levit.png"
description="An almost surreal scene in a concert hall. What follows though is
pure beauty."
%}
Have a nice weekend!
