---
layout: post
title: >-
    Industrial postdoc: benefits, considerations, and preparations
category: career
mathjax: true
tags: industrial postdoc
---

A PhD-candidate friend, who recently faces the choice between a postdoc position
in academia and one in industry, asked me for both advantages and disadvantages
of doing a postdoc in a company. Since the question may also interest other
students and researchers, I want to share my thoughts here.

I believe that it is worth doing a postdoc in industrial research, both
professionally and personally. If you have the opportunity to work in a good
team in a company that respects and values research, it can be a rewarding step
in your career. 

I write this piece with quite a few biases. After PhD training, I joined my
company as a research scientist who is supposed to support drug-discovery
projects right away. I therefore did not have a postdoc contract, neither in
academia nor in industry.  I was very fortunate to work on questions that are
more of an exploratory nature in my early days at the company, thanks to the
visionary mentors and to a helpful team. Nevertheless, I cannot tell what it is
like to be an industrial postdoc from my own experience.

Apart from not joining industry as a postdoc, I have only limited knowledge
about postdoc positions in academia. My experience comes mostly from
interactions with the researchers that I had worked with before I joined
industry, academic collaborators since then, and people who transitioned from an
academic postdoc position to industry. My impression of either academic or
industrial postdoc positions is, therefore, second-hand and incomplete at its
best. 

On the other side, many postdoc fellows that I have worked with, either in
academia or in industry, have confided me with their experience, feelings, and
thoughts. They shared both success stories and frustrations, many of which are
valuable but barely accessible to other students and researchers. It is my
privilege to listen to and learn from so many enthusiastic, talented, and
hard-working scientists. While great resources are available helping people make
decisions between academia and industry, for instance the [*Ten Simple Rules for
Choosing between Industry and
Academia*](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000388) by David B. Searls
(*PLOS Computational Biology*, 5(6), 2009), a dedicated discussion about
industrial postdoc positions has been missing in public forums.  Therefore, I
feel obliged to synthesize my thoughts with many peoples' inputs on this topic
and put them down.

# Benefits of doing a postdoc in industry

There are many reasons speaking for doing a postdoc in industry. Below are the
ones that I found appealing to most people that I know.

Let us start with your long-term goal. Can you imagine putting your scientific
and personal knowledge and skills in an industrial setting? If your answer is
'Yes', doing a postdoc there is a good start. 

What happens if your answer is 'I do not know'? This is okay.  After all, like
many other people, you may have no or little experience with research in
industry, unless that you have worked there or have participated in
academic-industrial collaborations. A postdoc position, being temporary, offers
you both an opportunity to get first-hand experience with industrial research
and time to reflect in order to take decisions. The only way to answer the
question above is to give it a try yourself.

Then there are researchers who have long determined to apply their capacities in
industry. The decision may base on various considerations: better benefits in
general, more direct impact of your work, more respect for work-life balance,
less emphasis on paper writing and grant applications, *etc.* A postdoc position
offers a reality check: do the benefits match the working conditions? Is the
expected impact realistic and reachable? Does the work-life balance meet your
expectations? Are you satisfied with the fact that not all findings can be
shared with a wide community in a timely manner, at least not without legal and
intellectual-property considerations? The situation differs between companies
and between research areas, and one person's experience differs from that of
another one. Working as an industrial postdoc can either confirm your idea or
challenge it, enriching your experience in either way. It is like a honeymoon:
one is (hopefully) still under hormones, but at least some unrealistic
expectations will be smoothed out, while unexpected joys and frustrations may
bring new insights.

Even if your long-term goal is to build your expertise and career in academia,
an industrial postdoc experience may pay off in an unexpected manner. It can
help you grasp a comprehensive view of the practical side of your discipline and
its connections to other disciplines. In industrial research, the chance that
one discipline generating all research products, which later translate into
revenues and profits, dwindles to near zero. Take drug discovery as an example:
the list of disciplines that contribute to a new drug is long: biology,
chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology, computer science, mathematics, statistics,
engineering, *etc.* As a postdoc in industry, you are certainly expected to dive
deep into your discipline. At the same time, you will be inevitably exposed to
other research areas that are at least as exciting and important as yours own.
Being informed about the existence, importance, and problem-solving approaches
of related fields, and about the unique contribution of your research, is an
important plus for a postdoc position in industry. In a minimum, conducting
state-of-the-art research in your discipline and being informed about latest
trends in other disciplines help you identify questions that really matter, and
come up with solutions that are more likely to be practical and impactful. The
success of many academic scholars who have had industrial working experience
demonstrates that.

It is not to say that postdocs in academia are not informed about related
fields. In contrast, quite a few interesting academic postdoc projects that I
know are in fact the result of interdisciplinary collaboration. The major
difference between industry and academia lies in the incentives: while
industrial research puts investment return at the first place and therefore
values practical, applicable innovations that may turn into revenue and profit,
academic research is sometimes deemed as 'pure', driven primarily by curiosity
and novelty, and awarded mainly by publications, grants, and permanent
positions. A complex and valued product is usually the outcome of extensive human
collaboration - just think of the long closing credits following 
blockbuster films - and can hardly be delivered by experts of one discipline.
In contrast, an immortal paper or a distinguished career as a professor can
thrive on deep work in one area. Industrial research is thus born more
collaborative and interdisciplinary.

Besides as a means to achieve your long-term goal, working as an industrial
postdoc also creates, shapes, and expands your personal network in a different
way than an academic career would do. The industrial network, thanks to the
interdisciplinary nature, may consist of more diverse people with regard to
their nationality, educational background, and life philosophy. It may provide
only limited help when it comes to publications or grant applications, but does
provide you alternative views of work and life, which can be refreshing or even
thought-provoking. The benefit of such a network is also long-lasting: while the
postdoc contract has an end date, the contact network persists when you leave
the company or even the field of science. Having an active and heterogeneous
network may open unexpected new doors in later stages of your life.

In short, joining industry as a postdoc brings both professional and personal benefits.

# Considerations on doing a postdoc in industry

A postdoc position in industry demands more than excellence in your own field.
It requires that you communicate with experts of other fields and even influence
them. The primary goal is not confined to publishing papers (which are
nevertheless often desired) or to getting grants (probably rarely so). You are
expected to deliver convincing work that inspire others: scientists, managers,
and even investors. Are you a computational biologist? You do not stop when you
develop a new algorithm or model to explain things. You strive to make
predictions that wet-lab biologists and chemists can test. Are you a biologist?
Your goal extends beyond describing and explaining what you observe.  You put
them into the disease context and suggest new therapies. And so on. In short,
your work is judged not only by novelty, but also by applicability: does it
work? Does it improve the way how we discover new drugs? Can we make better
decisions about what patients need next than we could have done without your
research?

By creating an applicable novelty, you the postdoc will unavoidably interact with
experts of various domains, explain them why your work matters, and persuade
them why research resources including money and headcount should be allocated to
test your hypothesis. Besides being good (and more than that!) in your field and
pushing its frontiers, you have to communicate effectively with other experts, and
collaborate with them to shape a research that shall create products and value in
the coming months or years. That can be quite a challenge, especially for
graduate students, many of whom are trained to work in a different way. 

Again, this does imply that academic postdocs are narrowly or blindly focused on
their own fields of research. Quite on the opposite, I personally know
outstanding postdocs that outreach and collaborate beyond boundaries, who have
made a great impact both within and beyond their fields. I have little doubt
that many of them would do a great job in industry as well if they wish so and
if they are given the chance. In case you are new to interdisciplinary teamwork,
though, I wish to state the responsibility of an industrial postdoc explicitly
so that you are prepared.

Working in interdisciplinary teams may lead you to ask yourself: what is the
point of going so deep in my field? Some people may answer: well, not that much.
They may find other jobs in the company or in other companies later. Other
people will instead learn from the interactions exactly why their research is
important, and get motivated to dive deeper. Yet other people will spot the
needs and gaps on the interfaces between disciplines, develop new techniques and
skills, and even create new research areas - these people often become giants in
the field. Learning how to constantly learn and apply new things, how to solve
complex problems under practical constraints such as time and budget, and how to
being both an respectable scientist and a team player is utterly important for a
postdoc in industry. If you take the challenge seriously, you may constantly
review your work critically and ask yourself: does my research matter? How can I
make it matter even more? By asking these questions and searching for answers, I
guess we may become better people and better scientists.

Besides scientific work, there is a social aspect of doing a postdoc in
industry. In biology and relevant fields, far more researchers perform their
postdoc research in academia than in industry. This may make it difficult for
industrial postdocs to exchange experience and perspectives, both personal and
scientific, with other fellows. Luckily, though, there are more and more
communities for postdocs and other junior researchers inside and between
companies nowadays, so that an industrial postdoc does not mean working in
isolation. Nevertheless, more can be done to promote exchange between industrial
and academic postdocs. The exchange is not only beneficial for science, but also
important for the mental health and personal development of postdoc researchers.

I have met students who worry that their experience in industry may bring them
unpleasant questions in future job interviews, in case they return to academia
later - 'Did you decide to join industry? Why do you now come back?'. I think
there are two aspects here. In many cases, people are just curious - after all,
many interviewers are also scientists like us, who are at least defined by their
curiosity. Some students worry that the questions are not free of a scrutinizing
undertone. I do not know how often this happens. I believe, however, that a
capable scientist is welcome anywhere, whether she or he has stayed in academia
or has switched between the sides. 

In industry, you will likely communicate, collaborate, and challenge yourself a
lot. Consider it well before you decide for a postdoc there.

# Preparations once you have made up your mind

Let us suppose that you have convinced the recruiting team, received an offer,
and you are determined to take the industrial postdoc job. How to prepare for
it? You can get a mental picture of the work ahead by talking with your future
supervisor(s) and team members and asking them questions. The questions can be
about the project. For instance, what is the expected outcome?  Are there past
experience and existing solutions in your or another team that can help with
some part of the project? Where do they foresee the applications of the outcome?
The questions can also be about personal and career development: what training
opportunities does the company offer? Is there an ombudsman or ombudswoman whom
you can turn to in case of conflicts?  What are the possibilities after the
postdoc? Do not be shy to ask questions. As a friend put it: people were in your
shoes not so long ago.

Be prepared to keep asking questions and upholding communications with your
colleagues after you enter the job. It helps to orient yourself and to
understand the team. You will soon have a fair idea how team members help each
other, how willing they are to help you - which can be very valuable - and how
you can help them in turn. Knowing the background, motivation, and unique skills
of team members and collaborators will make you get help faster when you need
it. The knowledge will also help you strengthen and expand your network by
spreading the word to others who may need help.

It is important to strike a balance between being focused and looking one step
ahead. On the one hand, you must focus on your postdoc project and deliver
within defined time and budget new insights and tools. On the other hand, it is
wise to cast a plan for the post-postdoc time, regularly review it, and adjust
it accordingly: Are you on the right track with regard to publications,
networking, *etc.*? What skills do you have to learn to make your next step
feasible?  Admittedly, it is challenging to keep the balance well all the time.
It becomes easier with exercise. Self-reflections and exchange with the
supervisor or a caring team member make quite a difference, too. Do not worry if
you struggle to find the balance: we all have to learn it all life long.

Last but not least, joining industry does not mean cutting your relationship
with academia. It is helpful to stay in touch with your peers, mentors, and
collaborators both personally and professionally. If you wish and if your
current supervisor and colleagues like it, you can discuss your future plans
with them. They may share new insights with you based on their own experience.
You may even continue collaborating with them while being a postdoc in the
company, depending on the needs of the project and on policies of the company
and of the academic institute. As the Chinese put it, do not burn the bridge.
Build it instead.

Asking questions, balancing focus and perspective, and keeping academic
relations do not guarantee a perfect start in your industrial postdoc position,
but will probably make it easier.

# How should I decide?

You are welcome to use the list of considerations above to inform your decision.
Gather more information by talking with family members and friends about your
ambitions, questions, and worries. Listen to yourself. Make a decision. Go
ahead. 

No matter what your choice is: be open, be kind, learn, and discover.

The postdoc is, after all, only one step in a long career. Even if it turns out
to be a detour, you may take something useful and memorable from it. Much luck
and success with your decision!

*I thank Iakov Davydov and Alexander Zipperer, both highly valued postdocs and
friends, for their input. I thank many extraordinary mentors that I have had, in
particular Clemens Broger ($^\dagger 2017$), Martin Ebeling, Ulrich Certa,
Manfred Kansy, and Fabian Birzele. I thank the members of the Bioinformatics and
Exploratory Data Analysis team for their help, support, and feedback.*

*The assay states my personal opinions, not those of F.  Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.*
