---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 9 (June 8-14, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinates me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Drug discovery

### Solving problems that both matter and are computationally solvable

Please see [my blog post *Spotting problems that both matter and are
computationally solvable*]({% post_url
2020-06-07-problems-that-matter-and-can-be-computed %}) for some thoughts.

### Systems Modelling in Pharma - Problem Solving Workshop

I received via the SIAM (Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics) mailing
list an invitation to register the *2020 Systems Modelling in the Pharmaceutical
Industry - Problem Solving Workshop*, organized by the Fields Institute. [Here
is the link](http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/activities/20-21/systems-modelling).

Th workshop aims to equip graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
mathematics and related disciplines with the tools necessary to solve common
modelling problems encountered in the pharmaceutical industry. The workshop is
aimed for upper-level undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. It was
originally planned as a one-week workshop. However, due to the online nature of
this year’s half a day virtual workshop, registration is open to anyone to whom
this may be of interest.

### Neutralising antibodies against SARS-Cov-2

The post [*Lots of Coronavirus Antibody
News*](https://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2020/06/09/lots-of-coronavirus-antibody-news)
in the blog *In the pipeline* run by Derek Lowe provides a timely update of
antibody therapeutic candidates against SARS-Cov-2.

It covers two recent reports ([Ju *et
al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2380-z) and [Shi *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2381-y), both from Chinese
institutes and both published on *Nature*) about neutralising antibodies against
the virus. The antibodies are mostly monoclonal (namely they consist of many
different antibodies), and their efficacy seems to be correlated with their
affinity to the receptor-binding domain of the viral spike protein.

An interesting fact I learned is that most therapeutic antibodies are dosed
around 10mg/kg (data were acquired by Derek Lowe from this interesting tutorial
paper on [PK of monoclonal
antibodies](https://ascpt.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cts.12567) by
Ovacik and Lin). In the reports above the dose in animal testing was 50mg/kg. If
we translate that number to a human of 70kg, we would need 3.5 gram purified
protein per dose. How much is that?  From [this
paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4078128/) we learn that, for
instance, the injection volumes of trastuzumab (a cancer drug targeting
Her2/ERBB) at a dose of 6 mg/kg for a patient with a body weight of 70 kg amount
to 20 mL for intravenous administration. If the same concentration is used for
our antibody, we would need almost 160mL injection. That is almost half of a
normal coffee mug! Apparently we need more specific antibodies, or if not
available, definitely *a lot* of them.

It is therefore not surprising that the post highlights the potential bottleneck
of antibody production capacity (see the article published on
[biocentury.com](https://www.biocentury.com/article/305402)).

## Biology

### mTOR regulates stress-induced mutagenesis

[Cipponi *et al.*](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6495/1127)
reported on *Nature* their findings that mTOR regulates drug resistance.
Non-genotoxic drug selection leads to growth limiting stress, which activates
DNA damage response and inhibits mTOR signalling, which lead to less accurate
DNA repair. The net effect is an increase of genetic diversity and drug
resistance.

Using multiple small molecules that target several targets and genome-wide shRNA
screening, the team identified mTOR as a common evolutionary capacitor, namely
knock-down of genes positively regulating mTOR activity increases genetic
diversity. They found that inhibition of mTOR fosters adaptive mutagenesis by
repressing accurate DNA repair.

The final figure (Figure 4) of the paper shows the dynamic change of the fitness
landscape of cancer cells under pharmacological pressure. In the first phase of
adaptation, which takes about 35-45 weeks (shorter than a month), an equilibrium
is gradually established between damages induced by the deleterious effect
conferred by initial genomic instability and the beneficial effect conferred by
resistant genomic configurations. The equilibrium is reached in the second phase
of the response.

### Nearly PAM-less CRIPSR-Cas9

The CRISPR-Cas9 system of genome editing requires that a short sequence of 2-6
base pairs, known as the [protospacer adjacent motif
(PAM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protospacer_adjacent_motif), immediately
follows the DNA sequence targeted by the Cas9 nuclease.

In bacteria, PAM is used to distinguish self from non-self DNA, preventing the
CRISPR locus from being targeted and destroyed by the nuclease. In the context
of genome editing, if the target DNA sequence is not followed by the PAM
sequence, Cas9 will not bind to or cleave the target DNA sequence. Some
disease-causing genes, therefore, are not amenable to CRISPR-Cas9 editing.

[Walton *et al.*](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6488/290) (Science,
2020) and [Chatterjee *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0517-0) (Nature Biotechnology,
2020) reported engineered Cas9 enzyme variants that have less requirement about
the PAM sequences. While Walton used structure information of Cas9-DNA binding
to perform mutagenesis to relax Cas9 PAM preference, Chatterjee started by
comparing orthologues of Cas9 and identified a mutation (threonine, abbreviated
as `T`, uncharged, to lysine, abbreviated as `K`, positively charged) and a
positively charged loop sequence that reduce the stringency of PAM dependency
and improve the targeting breadth and efficiency of the Cas9 enzyme.

Figure 2b of Chatterjee *et al.* is especially interesting, which shows that
their variant of Cas9 (Sc++ and HiFi-Sc++) show comparable or reduced off-target
potential compared with the original Cas9 enzyme. And the off-target potential
is dependent on the target: while editing of *VEGFA* ([Vascular endothelial
growth factor A](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/7422), Entrez Gene ID 7422) with
Sc++ induces more than 30 off-target sites with less than 6 mismatches (6 in
case of HiFi-Sc++), editing *EMX1* ([empty spiracles homeobox
1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/2016). Gene ID 2016) with HiFi-Sc++ induced
only 6 off-target sites (0 in case of HiFi-Sc++).

Both studies provide new tools for genome editing. Off-target effects and
editing efficiency remain challenges of using these tools in therapeutic
settings.

### Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) macrophages

Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells have been tested to treat haematologic
cancer. Their application to solid tumours, however,  have turned out to be
challenging.

[Klinchinsky *et al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0462-y)
(*Nature Biotechnology* 2020) reported engineered CAR macrophages that resemble
a pro-inflammatory phenotype (so-called &lsquo;M1&rsquo; macrophage, though the
dichotomous classification of macrophages into M1 and M2 types is debated).
These CAR-Ms express pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, converted
bystander M2 macrophages to M1 types, up-regulated genes involved in antigen
presentation, recruited T cells and presented antigens to them, and resisted the
effects of immunosuppressive cytokines.

### Meta-analysis of single-cell datasets for SARS-CoV-2

See my other blog [Meta-analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing studies for
SARS-CoV-2]({% post_url 2020-06-09-meta-analysis-of-scRNAseq-for-Cov19 %}).

## Mathematics and machine learning

The mathematician Weinan E gave a talk on *SIAM Mathematics of Data Science
Conference* with the title *A mathematical perspective of of Machine Learning*.
The recording is available on
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4PKudVGz4GM&list=PLcntFj46o5pFBKIGgKJ55q10D5pYc8JOu&index=8).

## Programming

### Logstash

I summarize my learning notes in another blogpost [Learning Logstash]({%
post_url 2020-06-05-Logstash %}. The learning was inspired and encouraged by
[baddila](https://github.com/badilla).

## Other gems

* [It is as if you were doing
    work](https://pippinbarr.github.io/itisasifyouweredoingwork/). A satirical
    Win95-style working desktop. Source: [Hacker
    News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23430671).
* I finished reading the booklet [Der kleiner
    Schweizermacher](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/37917218-der-kleine-schweizermacher)
    about the regional history (*Landeskunde* in German) of Switzerland.
