---
layout: post
title: Postdoc in Pharma: Pros, Precautions, and Preparations
category: career
mathjax: true
tags: industrial postdoc
---

* TOC
{:toc}

Ten years ago, I joined my company to perform applied research after I got my
PhD degree. Working as a computational biologist in drug discovery, I often get
questions from students and junior researchers who are in their first postdoc
position. The most frequent question that I get is &lsquo;*How does industrial
research look like/compare with academia?*&rsquo;. It is only closely followed
by the relevant question: &lsquo;*Would you recommend working in
industry?*&rsquo;.

Both questions show that, despite huge investment in research and development by
the pharmaceutical and life-science industry (some companies spend almost 20% of
their income), industrial research remains mysterious for students and junior
researchers (and probably even more so for the public). It is therefore not
surprising that when students and junior researchers weight their career
options, they often leave out the option of pursuing a postdoc position in
industrial research, or rank it behind other options, for instance pursuing a
tenure track in academia, working for government or non-government
organizations, and aiming at a permanent position in industry. The fact that
much fewer industrial postdoc positions are available, in contrast with the
abundance of academic postdoc positions (though individual experience may vary
here), also contributes to the limited awareness about them.

I believe that it is worth doing a postdoc in industrial research, both
professionally and personally. If you have the opportunity to work with a good
mentor, in a supportive team, and in a company that respects and values
research, it can be a rewarding step in your career.

I came to this conclusion by working with and learning from postdocs both in
academia and in industry. They include academic collaborators, postdocs in the
company that I have either worked with or supervised, and researchers who
transitioned from academic postdoc positions to industry.

These postdoc fellows shared both success stories and frustrations with me. They
confided me with their experience, feelings, and thoughts, many of which are
valuable for but barely accessible to students and other researchers. It is my
privilege to listen to and learn from so many enthusiastic, talented, and
hard-working scientists. While great resources are available helping people make
decisions between academia and industry, for instance the [*Ten Simple Rules for
Choosing between Industry and
Academia*](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000388) by David B. Searls
(*PLOS Computational Biology*, 5(6), 2009), a dedicated discussion about
industrial postdoc positions, particularly in the pharmaceutical and
life-science industry, has been missing in public forums. Therefore, I feel
obliged to synthesize my thoughts with many peoples' inputs on this topic and
put them down.

# Benefits of doing a postdoc in industry

There are many reasons speaking for doing a postdoc in industry. Below are the
ones that I found convincing and appealing to most people that I know.

Let us start with your long-term goal. Can you imagine putting your scientific
and personal knowledge and skills in an industrial setting? That is, do you like
the idea of performing applied research to turn discoveries and knowledge into
product and profit?

This question has an ethical dimension. While some people believe that science
is useless unless it serves the benefit of the mankind, other people argue that
the scientific ideal of objectivity and truth-seeking is eroded by the pursuit
of profit.

If you have thought about the question and your answer is &lsquo;Yes&rsquo;,
doing a postdoc in industry is a good start. Compared with a permanent position,
which cannot be permanent in reality because of reorganizations, acquisitions,
and mergers, a postdoc position offers an opportunity to experience the working
conditions in industry without being bound to them for a long time. The
competition to get the position is high, due to the limited job offering and the
benefits that are discussed below, but the reward is correspondingly attractive.
During the postdoc, you will enjoy both rich resources provided by the company,
for instance the latest technologies and invited talks by top experts, and
connections as well as collaborations with other researchers in the world. If
you seize the chance to make discoveries that improve our understanding of human
diseases and how drugs work (or not), you will have many doors open to you after
the postdoc, including those positions that require &lsquo;industrial working
experience&rsquo;, for which fresh PhD students and academic postdocs are
(sometimes unreasonably) not eligible.

You may have long determined to apply your capacities in industry. Your decision
may base on various considerations: better benefits in general, more direct
impact of your work, more respect for work-life balance, less emphasis on grant
application and paper writing and first-authorship (yes, you can be a respectable
scientist without being a first-author), *etc.* A postdoc position offers a
reality check: do the benefits match the working conditions? Is the expected
impact realistic and reachable? Does the work-life balance meet your
expectations? Are you satisfied with the fact that not all findings can be
shared with a wide community in a timely manner, at least not without legal and
intellectual-property considerations? The situation differs between companies
and between research areas, and one person's experience differs from that of
another one. Working as an industrial postdoc can either confirm your idea or
challenge it, enriching your experience in either way. It is like a honeymoon:
one is (hopefully) still under hormones, but at least some unrealistic
expectations will be smoothed out, while unexpected joys and frustrations may
bring new insights.

What happens if your answer to the question above is 'I do not know'? This is
okay. After all, like many other people, you may have no or little experience
with research in industry, unless that you have worked there or have
participated in academic-industrial collaborations. A postdoc position offers
you both an opportunity to get first-hand experience with industrial research
and time to reflect in order to take decisions. The only way to find the answer
to the question above is to give it a try yourself.

Even if your long-term goal is to build your expertise and career in academia,
an industrial postdoc experience may pay off in an unexpected manner. It can
help you grasp a comprehensive view of the practical side of your discipline and
its connections to other disciplines. In industrial research, the chance that
one discipline generating all research products, which later translate into
revenues and profits, dwindles to near zero. Take drug discovery as an example:
the list of disciplines that contribute to a new drug is long: biology,
chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology, computer science, mathematics, statistics,
engineering, *etc.* As a postdoc in industry, you are certainly expected to dive
deep into your discipline. At the same time, you will be inevitably exposed to
other research areas that are at least as exciting and important as yours own.
Being informed about the existence, importance, and problem-solving approaches
of related fields, and about the unique contribution of your research, is an
important plus for a postdoc position in industry. It helps you identify
questions that really matter, and come up with solutions that are more likely to
be practical and impactful. The success of many academic scholars who have had
industrial working experience demonstrates that.

The major difference between industry and academia lies in the incentives: while
industrial research puts investment return at the first place and therefore
values practical, applicable innovations that may turn into revenue and profit,
academic research is sometimes deemed as 'pure', driven primarily by curiosity
and novelty, and awarded mainly by publications, grants, and permanent
positions. A complex and valued product is usually the outcome of extensive
human collaboration - just think of the long closing credits following
blockbuster films - and can hardly be delivered by experts of one discipline.
In contrast, an immortal paper or a distinguished career as a professor can
thrive on deep work in one area. Industrial research is thus born more
collaborative and interdisciplinary.

Besides as a means to achieve your long-term goal, working as an industrial
postdoc also creates, shapes, and expands your personal network in a different
way than an academic career would do. The industrial network, thanks to the
interdisciplinary nature, may consist of more diverse people with regard to
their nationality, educational background, and life philosophy. It may provide
only limited help when it comes to publications or grant applications, but does
provide you alternative views of work and life, which can be refreshing or even
thought-provoking. The benefit of such a network is also long-lasting: while the
postdoc contract has an end date, the contact network persists when you leave
the company or even the field of science. Having an active and heterogeneous
network may open unexpected new doors in later stages of your life.

In short, joining industry as a postdoc brings both professional and personal
benefits.

# Considerations on doing a postdoc in industry

A postdoc position in industry demands more than excellence in your own field.
It requires that you communicate with experts of other fields and even influence
them. The primary goal is not confined to publishing papers (which is
nevertheless often desired) or to getting grants (rarely so). You are expected
to deliver convincing work that inspire others: scientists, managers, and even
investors. Are you a computational scientist? You do not stop when you develop a
new algorithm or model to explain things. You strive to make predictions that
wet-lab biologists and chemists can test. Are you a wet-lab scientist? Your goal
extends beyond describing and explaining what you observe. You put them into the
disease context and suggest new therapies. And so on. In short, your work is
judged not only by novelty, but also by universal applicability: does your
method work? Is it robust? Does it improve the way how we discover new drugs?
Can we make better decisions about what patients need next than we could have
done without your research?

In short, your duty as a industrial research postdoc is to communicate and
collaborate to bring a research idea into life, which shall create products and
value in the coming months or years. You must take a professional attitude and
put personal interests behind a common goal. It can be quite a challenge,
especially for graduate students that are trained to work in a different way.

Working in interdisciplinary teams may lead you to ask yourself: what is the
point of going so deep in my field? Some people may answer: well, not that much.
They may find other jobs in the company or in other companies later. Other
people will instead learn from the interactions exactly why their research is
important, and get motivated to dive deeper. Yet other people will spot the
needs and gaps on the interfaces between disciplines, develop new techniques and
skills, and even create new research areas - these people often become giants in
the field.

Learning how to constantly learn and apply new things, how to solve complex
problems under practical constraints such as time and budget, and how to being
both an respectable scientist and a team player is utterly important for a
postdoc in industry. If you take the challenge seriously, you may constantly
review your work critically and ask yourself: does my research matter? How can I
make it matter even more? By asking these questions and searching for answers, I
guess we may become better scientists and better people.

Besides scientific work, there are structural and social aspects of doing a
postdoc in industry. During the postdoc, changes may happen to the project or to
the team.  For instance, if a postdoc project studies a particular product and
the company lost its interest in it after the project started, the project may
be stopped. Alternatively, in case of reorganization events, the project may also be
phased out. It is wise to consider these risks before the project starts and
implement countermeasures, for instance setting up a project that will
eventually benefit several projects, and defining a plan B in case of structural
changes.

Besides a stable environment, a postdoc researcher needs to exchange with other
fellows. The exchange is necessary for people to keep their mental health and
grow and for science to thrive. Unfortunately, far more researchers perform
their postdoc research in academia than in industry. And the communication
between postdocs in academic and in industry is restrained by legal and
intellectual property considerations, and by spatial and organizational
separations. This may make it difficult for industrial postdocs to exchange
experience and perspectives, both personal and scientific, with other fellows.
Luckily, though, there are more and more communities for postdocs and other
junior researchers inside and between companies nowadays, so that an industrial
postdoc does not mean working in isolation. Nevertheless, more can be done to
promote exchange between industrial and academic postdocs.


Though industrial postdocs have bright outlooks in general, it is a dangerous
thought to think of a postdoc contract as a ticket to permanent employment in
the same company. Past experience suggests that while all postdocs find jobs
when they finish, only a small proportion stay. The postdoc is probably best
imagined as a room where you the kid are free to create, experiment, and invite
friends over. The room can be turned into a gallery or otherwise reused when you
leave home. It may be alluring to imagine it as a cradle in which you the infant
seek comfort, feel safe, and fall asleep. The bitterness awaits when you wake
up.

Since we are discussing the perspective: I have met students who worry that
their experience in industry may bring them unpleasant questions in future job
interviews, in case they return to academia later - &lsquo;*Did you decide to
join industry? Why do you now come back?*&rsquo;. I think there are two aspects
here. In many cases, people are just curious - after all, many interviewers are
also scientists like us, who are at least defined by their curiosity. Some
students worry that the questions are not free of a scrutinizing undertone. I do
not know how often this happens. I believe, however, that a capable scientist is
welcome anywhere, whether she or he has stayed in academia or has switched
between the sides.

In industry, you will likely communicate and collaborate. You will be challenged
by yourself and by the environment a lot. Consider it well before you decide for a
postdoc there.

# Preparations once you have made up your mind

When there is a job vacancy and you consider applying for it, make sure that you
have a clearly defined research project and a respectable supervisor. An ideal
research project have three properties: it addresses the most important question
in your field (&lsquo;*What are the important problems in your field, and why
aren't you working on them?*&rsquo;, so would the mathematician Richard Hamming
ask), you resonate with it and believe that you can contribute to solving it
with your unique expertise and experience, and it can be executed with the
dedicated resources. If case of any doubt and ambiguity about them, try all you
can do to understand the last detail before you apply.

Your supervisor is ideally a competent scientist that is recognized both inside
the company and in the scientific community. Beyond that, the importance of a
caring supervisor who respects your ideas, gives you freedom, and supports your
development cannot be overestimated. Sometimes, an industrial postdoc can have
more than one supervisor or have academic co-supervisors. Make sure that you
talk with them and try to understand what motivates them. To an extent, choosing
the right people to work with is more important than where those people work,
let it be industry or academia.

The same process of talking with and learning from people can be done for other
people with whom you will interact. A mutual fit will increase both the
likelihood of success of your postdoc project and the overall life satisfaction.

Because the positions are limited and there are usually many outstanding
candidates with matching profiles, it can happen that your application is
rejected. Do not take this personal. Ask for feedback and suggestions if
possible.

Let us suppose that you have convinced the recruiting team, received an offer,
and you are determined to take job. How to prepare for it? You can get a mental
picture of the work ahead by talking with your future supervisor(s) and team
members and asking them questions. The questions can be about the project. For
instance, what is the expected outcome in terms of publications, patents,
*etc.*? Are there past experience and existing solutions in your or another team
that can help with some part of the project? Where do they foresee the
applications of the outcome? The questions can also be about personal and career
development: what training opportunities does the company offer? Is there an
ombudsman or ombudswoman whom you can turn to in case of conflicts? What are the
possibilities after the postdoc? Do not be shy to ask questions. People were in
your shoes not so long ago.

Be prepared to keep asking questions and upholding communications with your
colleagues after you enter the job. It helps to orient yourself and to
understand the team. You will soon have a fair idea how team members help each
other, how willing they are to help you - which can be very valuable - and how
you can help them in turn. Knowing the background, motivation, and unique skills
of team members and collaborators will make you get help faster when you need
it. The knowledge will also help you strengthen and expand your network by
spreading the word to others who may need help.

It is important to strike a balance between being focused and looking one step
ahead. On the one hand, you must focus on your postdoc project and deliver
results within defined time and budget. On the other hand, it is wise to cast a
plan for the post-postdoc time, regularly review it, and adjust it accordingly:
Are you on the right track with regard to publications, networking, *etc.*? What
skills do you have to learn to make your next step feasible? Admittedly, it is
challenging to keep the balance well all the time.  It becomes less painful with
exercise. Self-reflections and exchange with the supervisor or a caring team
member make quite a difference, too. Do not worry if you struggle to find the
balance: we all have to learn it all life long.

Finally, joining industry does not mean cutting your relationship with academia.
It is helpful to stay in touch with your peers, mentors, and collaborators both
personally and professionally. If you wish and if your current supervisor and
colleagues like it, you can discuss your future plans with them. They may bring
you new insights.  You may even end up collaborating with them while being a
postdoc in the company or even after that. As the Chinese put it, do not burn
the bridge.  Build it instead.

Finding the right project and the right supervisor, asking questions, balancing
focus and perspective, and keeping academic relations, alas, do not guarantee a
perfect start in your industrial postdoc position. I hope, however, that they
help you survive the transition with fewer surprises.

# Conclusions, or, how should I decide?

You are welcome to use the list of considerations above to inform your decision.
Gather more information by talking with family members and friends about your
ambitions, questions, and worries. Listen to yourself. Make a decision. Go
ahead.

No matter what your choice is: be open, be kind, learn, and discover.

The postdoc is, after all, only one step in a long career. Even if it turns out
to be a detour, you may take something useful and memorable from it. Much luck
and success with your decision!

*I thank Iakov Davydov, Alexander Zipperer, Simon Gutbier, all highly valued
postdocs and friends, for their input. I thank many extraordinary mentors that I
have had, in particular Clemens Broger ($^\dagger 2017$), Martin Ebeling, Ulrich
Certa, Manfred Kansy, and Fabian Birzele. I also thank Milad Adibi, Roland
Schmucki, Gregor Sturm, Tony Kam-Thong, Diana Marek, Ekaterina Breous-Nystrom,
and Petar Scepanovic for criticism and feedback. I thank the members of the
Bioinformatics and Exploratory Data Analysis team for their help, support, and
feedback.*

*The assay states my personal opinions, not those of F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.*
